.TH TORDNSEL 8 "28 February 2008" "TORDNSEL"

.SH NAME
tordnsel \- an active-testing, DNS-based list of Tor exit IP addresses

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B tordnsel
[\fI--OPTION value\fR]...

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBtordnsel\fR is a name server providing a DNSBL-style interface to a
dynamically-updated list of Tor exit IP addresses. It is designed to be useful
to operators of Internet services, such as web sites and IRC networks, who want
to detect anonymous clients and treat them differently from non-anonymous
clients. Since not every Tor exit allows connections to the entire Internet,
\fBtordnsel\fR extends the DNSBL interface to require specifying the service's
IP address and port in queries.
.PP
\fBtordnsel\fR runs alongside a local \fBtor\fR client, to which it establishes
a persistent controller connection. The \fBtor\fR process fetches up-to-date Tor
directory information and serves as \fBtordnsel\fR's entry point into the Tor
network for active testing.
.PP
\fBtordnsel\fR can optionally perform active exit testing by launching an HTTP
request to itself through every Tor exit with a suitable exit policy. This
allows it to detect exits configured to send outbound connections through a
different IP address from the one they advertise in the directory. When
configured to run active tests, \fBtordnsel\fR tests through a particular exit
each time it publishes a new descriptor.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB-h, --help\fP
Display a usage message and exit.
.TP
\fB-f, --ConfigFile \fR\fIFILE\fP
\fIFILE\fR contains further "option value" pairs.
.TP
\fB--verify-config\fP
Verify the configuration file is valid and exit.
.TP
\fB--reconfigure \fR\fIDIRECTORY\fP
Read a configuration file from the standard input stream and use it to
reconfigure the \fBtordnsel\fR process whose \fBRuntimeDirectory\fR is located
at \fIDIRECTORY\fR.
.TP
\fB--version\fP
Display TorDNSEL version and exit.
.PP
Other options can be specified either on the command-line (\fI--option
value\fR), or in the configuration file (\fIoption value\fR). Options are
case-insensitive.

.SH REQUIRED OPTIONS
The following options must be specified for \fBtordnsel\fR to start:
.TP
\fBZoneOfAuthority \fR\fIFQDN\fP
Answer queries authoritatively for \fIFQDN\fR. For example, if this is set to
"exitlist.example.com.", your server would accept queries of the form
"1.0.0.10.80.4.3.2.1.ip-port.exitlist.example.com.".
.TP
\fBDomainName \fR\fIFQDN\fP
Use \fIFQDN\fP as this server's own domain name in NS and SOA records.
.TP
\fBSOARName \fR\fIFQDN\fP
Use \fIFQDN\fR as the email address in the RNAME field of SOA records. This
should be an address at which the operator of this \fBtordnsel\fR instance can
be contacted, e.g. "tordnsel@example.com" in the form of a fully-qualified
domain name ("tordnsel.example.com.").
.TP
\fBStateDirectory \fR\fIDIRECTORY\fP
Store exit test results in \fIDIRECTORY\fR. If \fBChangeRootDirectory\fR is
specified, this should be an absolute path accessible inside the chroot.
.TP
\fBRuntimeDirectory \fR\fIDIRECTORY\fP
Place the statistics and reconfigure sockets in \fIDIRECTORY\fR before chrooting
and dropping privileges.

.SH OPTIONAL OPTIONS
The following options either have sensible default values or can be left
unspecified:
.TP
\fBDNSListenAddress \fR\fIIPADDR\fR:\fIPORT\fP
Bind the name server to this IP address and UDP port. If you want to bind to all
interfaces, set \fIIPADDR\fR to "0.0.0.0". This port is bound before dropping
privileges. (Default: 127.0.0.1:53)
.TP
\fBAddress \fR\fIIPADDR\fP
Return \fIIPADDR\fR in response to requests for the A record matching the
\fBZoneOfAuthority\fR. (Default: none)
.TP
\fBTorControlAddress \fR\fIIPADDR\fR:\fIPORT\fP
Connect to \fBtor\fR's controller interface on this IP address and TCP port.
You'll need to set this as your \fBControlListenAddress\fR or \fBControlPort\fR
in \fBtor\fR's \fItorrc\fR. (Default: 127.0.0.1:9051)
.TP
\fBTorControlPassword \fR\fIPASSWORD\fP
The password you used to generate the \fBHashedControlPassword\fR in \fBtor\fR's
\fItorrc\fR. This is only required when you have a \fBHashedControlPassword\fR.
(Default: none)
.TP
\fBLog \fIminSeverity\fR \fBstdout\fR|\fBstderr\fR|\fBsyslog\fP
Send log messages of at least \fIminSeverity\fR to the standard output stream,
the standard error stream, or to the system logger. Recognized severity levels
are debug, info, notice, warn, and error. (Default: Log notice stdout)
.TP
\fBLog \fIminSeverity\fR \fBfile\fR \fIFILE\fP
As above, but send log messages to \fIFILE\fR. If \fBChangeRootDirectory\fR is
specified, \fIFILE\fR must be an absolute path accessible inside the chroot. In
that case, it's probably better to use \fBsyslog\fR.
.TP
\fBRunAsDaemon \fR\fBFalse\fR|\fBTrue\fP
If \fBTrue\fR, detach from the controlling terminal and run in the background as
a daemon. (Default: False)
.TP
\fBUser \fR\fIUSERNAME\fP
On startup, drop privileges to \fIUSERNAME\fP. (Default: none)
.TP
\fBGroup \fR\fIGROUPNAME\fP
On startup, drop privilegs to \fIGROUPNAME\fP. (Default: none)
.TP
\fBChangeRootDirectory \fR\fIDIRECTORY\fP
On startup, call
.BR chroot (2)
to irreversibly change the root directory of
the process to \fIDIRECTORY\fP. (Default: none)
.TP
\fBPIDFile \fR\fIFILE\fP
On startup, write our PID to \fIFILE\fP. \fIFILE\fP won't be removed on exit.
(Default: none)

.SH ACTIVE TESTING OPTIONS
The following options are only necessary if active testing through Tor exits
should be enabled:
.TP
\fBEnableActiveTesting \fR\fBFalse\fR|\fBTrue\fP
If \fBTrue\fR, enable active test connections through Tor exits to determine
their exit IP addresses. Enabling this will result in a more accurate view of
exit IP addresses, at the expense of putting a much greater load on your local
Tor process and the Tor network itself. (Default: False)
.TP
\fBTorSocksAddress \fR\fIIPADDR\fR:\fIPORT\fP
Make exit test connections through \fBtor\fR's \fBSocksPort\fR on this IP
address and TCP port. (Default: 127.0.0.1:9050)
.TP
\fBTestListenAddress \fR\fIIPADDR\fR:\fIPORT\fR,\fIPORT\fR,\fI...\fP
Bind the exit test listeners to this IP address and these TCP ports. These ports
are bound before dropping privileges. Don't use the loopback interface for
\fBTestListenAddress\fR if you're redirecting connections with
.BR iptables (8)
because your redirected packets will be dropped as martians. This option is only
required when \fBEnableActiveTesting\fR is set to \fBTrue\fR. (Default: none)
.TP
\fBTestDestinationAddress \fR\fIIPADDR\fR:\fIPORT\fR,\fIPORT\fR,\fI...\fP
Make exit test connections to this IP address and these TCP ports. These should
be publicly accessible from Tor exits. This option is only required when
\fBEnableActiveTesting\fR is set to \fBTrue\fR. (Default: none)

.SH SIGNALS
\fBtordnsel\fR catches the following signals:
.TP
\fBSIGTERM\fP
\fBtordnsel\fR will catch this, then clean up and exit.
.TP
\fBSIGINT\fP
The same behavior as with \fBSIGTERM\fR.
.TP
\fBSIGHUP\fP
This signal instructs \fBtordnsel\fR to reload its configuration, including
closing and reopening logs.
.TP
\fBSIGPIPE\fP
\fBtordnsel\fR catches this signal and ignores it.

.SH FILES
.TP
\fB/srv/tordnsel/tordnsel.conf\fP
The configuration file, which contains "option value" pairs.
.TP
\fB/srv/tordnsel/state\fP
The state directory where test results are stored.
.TP
\fB/srv/tordnsel/run\fP
The runtime directory where statistics and reconfigure sockets are located.
.TP
\fIStateDirectory\fR\fB/exit-addresses\fR and \fBexit-addresses.new\fP
These files hold the results of tests through Tor exits, including exit IP
addresses. The ".new" file is an append-only journal; when it gets too large,
and when a new network status consensus is received, all entries are merged into
a new exit-addresses file.
.TP
\fIRuntimeDirectory\fR\fB/statistics.socket\fP
A Unix domain stream socket that dumps cumulative load information when it
accepts a client connection. See contrib/cacti-input.pl in the TorDNSEL source
distribution for an example of using it.
.TP
\fIRuntimeDirectory\fR\fB/reconfigure.socket\fP
A Unix domain stream socket that accepts a new configuration file and
reconfigures the process with it. This is typically used by the
\fB--reconfigure\fR option.

.SH EXIT CODES
\fBtordnsel\fR exits with 0 on success, otherwise it exits with an appropriate
non-zero exit code from
.BR sysexits (3)
:
.TP
\fBEX_USAGE\fR (\fB64\fR)
Parsing command-line arguments failed.
.TP
\fBEX_DATAERR\fR (\fB65\fR)
Parsing the configuration file failed.
.TP
\fBEX_NOINPUT\fR (\fB66\fR)
Opening the specified configuration file failed.
.TP
\fBEX_UNAVAILABLE\fR (\fB69\fR)
\fB--reconfigure\fR was specified, but connecting to the reconfigure socket
failed.
.TP
\fBEX_SOFTWARE\fR (\fB70\fR)
An unspecified internal error occurred.
.TP
\fBEX_OSERR\fR (\fB71\fR)
Opening a listening socket failed.
.TP
\fBEX_OSFILE\fR (\fB72\fR)
A random number device couldn't be opened, or the UID/GID couldn't be looked up.
.TP
\fBEX_CANTCREAT\fR (\fB73\fR)
Preparing a directory, opening the PID file, or binding a Unix domain socket
failed.
.TP
\fBEX_IOERR\fR (\fB74\fR)
\fB--reconfigure\fR failed with an I/O error, or closing the DNS listener
failed.
.TP
\fBEX_PROTOCOL\fR (\fB76\fR)
\fB--reconfigure\fR failed because the other \fBtordnsel\fR process responded
with an unrecognized message.
.TP
\fBEX_NOPERM\fR (\fB77\fR)
One of the following happened: The resource limit on open file descriptors is
set too low, but the process isn't running as root. The configuration specified
\fBUser\fR, \fBGroup\fR, or \fBChangeRootDirectory\fR, but the process isn't
running as root. Reopening a listener failed due to a permission error.
.TP
\fBEX_CONFIG\fR (\fB78\fR)
\fBtordnsel\fR exited due to a configuration error.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR tor (8)
.PP
.B https://www.torproject.org/
.PP
.B https://www.torproject.org/svn/trunk/doc/contrib/torel-design.txt

.SH CAVEATS
Active testing puts an excessive load on the local \fBtor\fR process and the Tor
network because \fBtor\fR builds 4-hop circuits for test connections. Also, if a
particular exit is down, \fBtor\fR will keep building and failing new circuits
until a timeout occurs.

.SH AUTHORS
tup <tup.tuple@googlemail.com>
